Welcome back.
Let's continue our discussion with the most common tree data structure that is the binary search Street
which is a subset of binary tree which we talked about what is a binary search tree
a binary search tree are really really good as the name suggests at searching they're great for comparing
things.
Now why would this be better than let's say a hash table where we can just give it a key and get the
item right away.
Well this data structure preserves relationships just like you wouldn't want your folders on your computer
to be in a hash table data structure because there is no sort of relationship.
Instead you want your folders to have relationships to have a parent folder and a sub folder and in
a sub folder a thing like binary search tree allows us to preserve these relationships when it comes
to binary search trees.
These are the rules.
1 all child nodes in the tree to the right of the root node must be greater than the current node.
That means if I keep going to the right the number or the value of the node constantly increases.
You see over here I go from 1 to 1 1 2 5 1 44.
If I keep going to the right let's say here 33 to 37 that is increasing.
If I go to the left 1 to 1 33 9 that's always decreasing.
Same with here 1 2 5 to 54.
If I go to the left it decreases to the right.
It increases and then the second rule is that a node can only have up to two children because it's a
binary tree.
The advantage of a binary search tree is that well it should be obvious with the name right searching
and look up is very easy to find what you're looking for because if I'm looking for let's say number
thirty seven I can start at 1 or 1 and say is thirty seven.
Less than 1 to 1.
Yes.
Okay.
Then go to the left is thirty three less than thirty seven.
No.
Then go to the right and I find thirty seven.
I don't have to iterate in a linear fashion through each node and that is what Look up means look up
simply means that I can search for an item a lot faster than let's say an array where I have to iterate
and loop through every single item.
But what about insert and delete in a hash table I can do insert and delete really fast at 0 1 or Constantine
but with a binary search tree it looks like I can only do 0 log in and that should be obvious right.
Because in order for us to insert or delete something in a binary search tree we need to figure out
where to insert the item or where the item is before we delete it.
For example with a one hundred and five let's say that we want to delete one or five.
Well we have to first from the root note get to one hundred and five and then we have to decide which
node is going to take its place.
In this case because 54 is less than 144 144 is going to come up over here but as you can imagine this
operation although Seems simple right now.
If we had a lot of children and a lot of nested notes a lot of reordering needs to happen and shift
our nodes around.
And don't worry we're actually going to code this.
You understand us just like we have in previous data structures.
But I want to demonstrate instead of me just using my cursor here a nifty little tool to visualize how
binary search trees work and how their operations are Oh log of n we're going to use visual go again
and I'll link this and I highly recommend that you all play around with binary search trees.
But let's do a couple of operations here see that it generated a random binary search tree for me.
Let's say I wanted to do an answer and I want to insert let's say the number one 5 click go.
It's going to traverse figure out where it wants to insert and it's going to insert 1 What if I want
to insert perhaps number 44 this time around if I had go a traverses figures out where 44 should go
and places it down here.
So we're always traversing and figuring out using 0 log n where we should place the item.
What about removing.
Let's add one more.
I'm going to insert fifty one this time
so that it places it right over here.
Perfect.
Now let's say we want to delete 50 now five remove 50.
I hate go
I find 50.
Remove it and then I have to replace with 51 and go up.
So there's a bit of a tough little logic happening there.
There we're gonna have to incorporate and we're gonna get to that but for now as I end this video I
recommend that you go to visual go and play around with binary surgery so that you get accustomed to
it and as you play with it see if you notice a problem that we might encounter with binary search tree
because we're gonna discuss it in the next video.